There are some things even the elephant-headed remover of obstacles cant do much about. Two of them are GST and Demonetisation. Recently, they combined forces to subdue dahi handi celebrations and now paired up to play party poopers during Ganeshotsav. While the mammoth Ganesh mandals--with their large varganis (donations) and corporate sponsors--have been relatively immune from their onslaught, small mandals have been hit hard.
"Sponsorship? What sponsorship?" laughs Naresh Jain of Tarun Mitra Sarvajanik Ganeshotsav mandal which hosts Gigaum cha Vighnaharta. "We are having a tough time making ends meet," says Jain, adding that their regular sponsors have suffered 20 to 30 per cent losses post GST, causing them to back out this year. So Jain has had to cut down on crackers and music systems but has made sure not to extend such compromises to the Bappa's idol or the mandap decor. "How can you do less for God?" he asks.
Another consequence of GST is the rising prices of raw material, says Jitendra Khanvilar, chairman of Parmanand Wadi Bal Mitr Mandal of Mumbadevi cha Ganaraj. Their 24-ft-tall murti--which came at Rs 2.5 lakh last year--was priced at Rs 3 lakh this year. Also, as opposed to Rs 22 lakh--their budget last year--the mandal has spent only Rs 15 lakh this year for lack of sponsors and advertisements. "I think we will end up going into losses this year," says Khanvilar. The impact hasn't spared even Malabar Hill cha Raja, He of the affluent pin code. Nilesh Patel, president of Shri Bal Gopal Ganesh Utsav Mandal, reveals that they have had to cancel their routine musical invitation to a lezim group from Pune and hire a local group to reduce the expense from Rs 1.2 lakh to Rs 60,000.
Initiated by Bal Gangadhar Tilak during the freedom movement to unite diverse local groups, Ganeshotsav by now has become a well-oiled commercial machine. Donations have made it possible for Uday Salian of the famous Andhericha Raja-whose patrons include celebs such as Shilpa Shetty and Raveena Tandon and where everyone, not just the VIPs- "is allowed to touch the feet of the lord"--to afford not only reality show contestants this year but also WiFi, metal detectors, CCTVs and private male and female security guards. In fact, Sanjay Govindharmalkar of Girgaum cha Raja mandal, which has spent Rs 15 lakh, proudly declares a professional Kabaddi league as their largest sponsors this year. Deprived of such generosity, each member of the the small, jungle-themed Sonapur cha Raja has had to chip in Rs 5,000
However, such is Ganesha's pull that Sudhir Salvi of Akhil Chandanwadi Sarvajanik Ganeshutsav Mandal does not expect the ongoing Metro line construction work near his pandal to interfere with the turnout. "People who have relocated due to the construction work are coming back only to see the idol," he says.
This devotion is also why, despite rising costs, some mandal organisers such as Thane's Vinayak Kapdoskar have stuck by a unique resolution. "We are avoiding Chinese items," says .