CHENNAI: A majority of the railway projects in the country, including the quadrupling of lines between Chennai Beach and Korukkupet and the Sengottai-Punalur gauge conversion, estimated at Rs 1 lakh crore have slowed down or stopped since July 1 as the contractors executing them are at loggerheads with the national transporter over the rate of Goods and Services Tax (GST) for projects awarded before July 1.
Contractors across the country have decided to launch a 'down tools' from August 20, if the issue is not resolved. The tripling of lines on the Delhi-Jhansi and JhansiBhopal sections and con struction of subways and overbridges too have been affected.
Before GST, contractors had to pay a maximum of 4% service tax depending on the state in which the project was being carried out. From July 1, a GST of 18% was imF posed. The railways promised to bring it down to 12%, but there is no clarity , say contractors. Their margins had decreased due to this and they would have to execute the project at a loss as it was awarded under a lower tax regime."If contractors incur any additional cost in execution of works or in relation to performance of their obligations under the relevant agreement, they have to be compensated on introduction of new tax as principle of equity and justice," said an Indian Railway Infrastructure Providers Association (IRIPA) representation to the Prime Minister on August 14.
A large chunk of payments to contractors has not been made since July 1, IRIPA general secretary Rajesh Kumar Menghani told TOI. "Nobody has taken a bill as the additional tax will eat into their working capital," he said. This was confirmed by top railway officials from across the country . On Friday , Southern Railway all divisions and construction contractors association met general manager Vashishta Johri in Chennai. He promised to send the representation to the Railway Board. The Railway Board had on July 31 constituted a committee of P S Gupta, S C Jain and Sanjay Lavania to examine the impact of GST due to increased tax liability on ongoing projects awarded before the new tax came into force. The committee is to suggest remedial measures to meet the exigency arising out of this in a report that is to be submitted by August 31.
The IRIPA has suggested a formula where contractors would pay tax of 12% minus the total input credit on purchase of material. "This will come to around 6%. The rest will have to be borne by the railways," Menghani said.