Mumbai: Valuations of midcap and smallcap shares are at their highest levels but that is unlikely to stop them from extending their winning run in the coming months.
Analysts said unhindered flows from domestic investors many continue to find their way into mid and small-cap shares despite insipid earnings growth, helping them outperform the blue-chips, which form the Sensex and Nifty .
In the last one year, the Nifty Midcap index has risen 26% compared to the Nifty which has risen 16.3%.
"Midcaps are likely to continue with their outperformance because as of now there are no new negatives to be factored in. A lacklustre earnings growth was expected this quarter," said Kunj Bansal CIO- Equity at Centrum Wealth Management.
The record-breaking run of the Sensex and Nifty has been driven by a handful of stocks including Reliance Industries, HDFC Bank and HDFC. Reliance Industries, the most valued company by market capitalisation helped buoy the index by rising 57.4% in the last one year. HDFC Bank, another index heavyweight rose 44.6% in this period. In the mid-cap space, investors are likely to find more options.
"The large caps offer valuation comfort while midcaps offer growth comfort but somewhere down the line we see the growth comfort being preferred domestically and otherwise," said Pankaj Pandey, Head Research, ICICIdirect.com. The Price to Earnings ratio of Nifty Midcap index is at 66.5 times reported earnings while Nifty is trading at 25.6 times.
Analysts said the effect of higher provisioning for banks and financial services (BFSI) companies in the Nifty is likely to be higher in FY18 which could limit upsides in the benchmark indices. Bank shares have the highest weightage on the Sensex and Nifty . In comparison, the health of finance companies on the mid-cap index is better. So far in 2017 however, Nifty Bank index has risen 31% since the start of 2017 while Nifty Midcap has gained 25.9%.
Some believe that midcap companies still offer opportunities to invest in untapped spaces like internet and digital sectors. "There are high-growth, unique and emerging businesses as well as those that are expensive. One expensive pocket is the recent IPO listed companies, so one needs to be selective" said Dhiraj Sachdev, Fund Manager, HSBC Global Asset Management (India).
Analysts said investors are expecting a turnaround in earnings by September. "Investors are willing to pay a premium for companies where earnings predictability is there. They are also willing to look beyond June and till the end of the September quarter because of the GST led slowdown be it large or mid caps. But even after September if a revival in earnings is delayed, a correction could be in store," said Abhay Laijawala, Head, India Research, Deutsche Equities.