NEW DELHI: Hyundai India, the country's second-biggest carmaker, has hit back at the government's new enhanced GST tax rates for auto companies, saying the move will slow down car sales and will result in shaking the confidence of investors.
"Implementation of GST was to create a single unified large market with simplified tax structure for auto industry. However, the recent rolling back to multiple rates with pre-GST classification has come as a setback to industry, shaking the confidence of auto manufacturers," Hyundai India MD YK Koo said.
The top Hyundai official in India said that move - which has led to carmakers hiking prices of larger cars and SUVs -- will negatively impact sales in the all-crucial festive season.
"We expect the coming festive season will witness low customer sentiment on new purchase decision."
Koo said that in the absence of consistent and long-term policy, the investment for new products and new technology will be adversely impacted in India.
Hyundai joins the growing chorus of a section of auto makers who have criticised the government's recent flip-flop on tax rates on automobiles.
On Saturday, the GST Council had revised the tax structure on sedans and SUVs, opting to hike them by 2%, 5% and 7% across categories. Luxury companies have been particularly vocal about their displeasure on the government's move. They said that they are already heavily taxed and their customers have been paying more in levies when compared to other categories.
"The decision to increase the cess yet again is very unfortunate and totally overlooks the contribution we make to the industry and to the economy," Roland Folger, MD & CEO of Mercedes-Benz India said regarding the tax revision.
Audi India was also critical of the move. "The taxes on this industry were already very high," Rahil Ansari, Head of Audi India said.
Toyota India also expressed disappointment. "This would alter the market demand growth trends... hampering the nation's revenue collections which were moving positively with the erstwhile GST rates. These constant changes could lead to market instability, thus dampen the spirits of the industry across the entire value chain," Shekar Viswanathan, Vice-Chairman at Toyota Kirloskar.