NEW DELHI: The Consumer Price Index (CPI) or retail inflation, as it is more commonly known, rose 3.36 per cent in August from a year earlier, government data showed on Tuesday. The current rate of inflation is the highest in five months.
The rate however is still below the Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) medium-term target of 4 per cent.
The CPI had risen by 5.05 per cent for the month of August, a year ago.
The rise compares with a 3.20 per cent increase forecast by economists in a Reuters poll of 40 economists.
In July, the inflation rate had shot up for the first time in three months, when it rose by 2.36 per cent.
The Consumer Food Price Index (CFPI) has gone up to 1.52 per cent for the month of August as against (-) 0.36 per cent in July.
Monsoon rains this year have caused damages to crops of some perishable food items and hindered movement of goods.
In another set of data, the IIP or Index of Industrial Production for the month of July went up by 1.2 per cent. It has slipped from 4.5 per cent in the corresponding period, a year ago. The cumulative growth in IIP for the period April-July 2017 over the corresponding period of the previous year stands at 1.7 per cent.
The resulting hit from a shortage of production and supply of vegetables such as tomatoes and onions - which are basic ingredients in Indian kitchens - suggested inflation will be elevated in coming months. Early last month the Reserve Bank of India cut interest rates - making it the first Asian central bank to ease this year - on a subdued economic outlook.
But rising price pressures will complicate the RBI's policy path as the latest data for April-June quarter showed economic growth cooled to a three-year low as the GDP for the quarter stood at 5.7 per cent. Separately, the Reuters poll also predicted industrial output rose 1.2 per cent in July after contracting in June, despite disruptions caused by a new goods and services tax.
That revival was likely led by increased output in the eight core industries - which makes up about 40 per cent of overall industrial production.